---
title: "Jamming by John Kao"
date: 01/07/19
#output: html_document
images:
  - jamming_cover.jpg
---

Jamming: The Art and Discipline of Business Creativity by John Kao

This is a book that tries to introduce creativity as a business commodity, and give businesspeople a rough guide for intentionally bringing creativity into their companies/personal workflows.
Kao likens business creativity to jazz.  The comparison between business (or any creative process really) and jazz is my favorite aspect of this book. 

“Jazz- like business- implies a series of balancing acts. It must always be disciplined- but never driven- by formulas, agendas, sheet music. It must always be pushing outward, forward, upward,- and therefore, inevitably, against complacency.” (ch 3 p 29)

He goes on to explain the tension between structure and free-form. Jazz musicians want their sounds to be novel, perhaps unexpected, but at the same time, something recognizable, something that makes sense.  A jazz musician doesn’t stand on a stage and blow a series of incohesive notes, nor do they desire to play a series of tired old cliches.  Therein lies the tension. Somewhere between old and new, established and uncharted, there is an effective innovation to be harnessed.

That’s what I thoroughly enjoyed about this book.  Kao goes on, however, to basically trash tradition/any sort of established business practices.  He claims that jamming is about tension between established norms and uncharted exploration, but throughout the rest of the book, he spends little to no time explaining what sort of established norms are useful.  He seems to launch a scorched earth campaign against traditional business practices. 

“The Coca-Cola Company, for example, recently hired 150 new marketing people. None of them brought prior soft-drink industry experience. Jan Timmer made sure that not one manager involved in the change  process at Phillips Electronics had direct knowledge of the area he or she was responsible for” (ch. 8 p. 120). 

Where is the “balance” in that?  I appreciate the notion that an outside perspective is sometimes exactly what you need to inspire a great leap or innovation, but the key word there is sometimes. Expertise is still a great commodity!  Don’t throw it out the window in pursuit of a fresh idea!  What about making a point to hire some talent from outside your direct industry?  While it’s true that I’m picking one phrase to criticize, this is the general idea I took away from many chapters (it just happens that this is the most recent example I have as it’s at the very end of the book). 

To be fair, it’s important to keep in mind that Kao wrote this is the 1990’s.  I was but a babe in those years, but it’s possible that he was fighting an incredibly deep-seated culture of corporate conformity, bureaucracy, and ANTI-creativity.  Maybe, to make the splash that he wanted to make, he had to write a book that really flew in the face of business tradition.  By now (November 2017), the idea of some creative genius programmer sitting in their workspace (not workplace), wearing a hoodie (not a suit), and whipping up some market-disrupting piece of technology with nothing but a computer and some savvy cheeto-dusted fingers is a silicon valley cliche (indeed, it’s a scene in the show Silicon Valley).  Maybe in the 90’s that sounded like a slacker’s fantasy.

Kao quotes John Perry Barlow, cofounder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation and occasional lyricist for the Grateful Dead:  “‘We’re on the verge of an era in which you can start a multinational corporation in your garage’” (ch p 134).  Replace “garage” with “dorm room” and it sounds like Mr. Barlow was pretty spot on.

To end on a high note, The Epilogue: The Creativity Toolkit: A Guidebook for Monday Morning had some great ideas in it.  Instill lore in the company about creative leaps, find out how your workers get into the zone, document (with computers!) early, maybe scattered, thoughts you have so that later someone may connect those dots in a novel way. Etc. etc. etc.

A fun read.